Welcome to JW Broadcasting®
for December 2023!
On September 9, 2023,
the 48 students of the 154th class of Gilead
graduated in the presence of their family,
friends, and the United States Bethel family.
Mature brothers serving at Bethel
along with their Gilead instructors
gave the students loving encouragement
and reminders
to help them fulfill their commission
to strengthen and stabilize God’s people
wherever they are assigned.
We are sharing
these motivating talks with you
in Part 1 of this Gilead graduation program.
Well, we are here to celebrate
with the graduating class number 154
of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
Are you excited?
Well, we’re excited for you.
And this is the culmination of five months
of hard work on your part.
And we want to say
that we are proud
of each and every one of you,
and we love you.
And we know that you’re going to do
a tremendous amount of good
in your assignments.
Now, unlike the chairman
of the midweek meeting,
I’m not going to be able to give you
an overview of the information
we’re going to hear this morning.
But I can tell you one thing:
I’ve looked over the themes
that the instructors
and other responsible brothers
have turned in,
and they’re mighty interesting.
So let’s get started.
Let’s hear the first talk.
Now, the first talk is going to be given
by Brother Jody Jedele,
who was recently chosen
as a helper to the Service Committee.
And Brother Jedele’s theme is
“Remember the Builder.”
Let’s listen.
A master builder is responsible
for every aspect
in the creation of a building
—beginning to end—
including oversight
of those performing the work.
Jehovah is mankind’s Master Builder.
As Gilead students, soon-to-be graduates,
you have the precious privilege
of further supporting the Master Builder
by strengthening and stabilizing,
yes, building up Jehovah’s people.
How can you do that successfully?
Well, turn with me, please,
to the book of Psalms,
Psalm 127—the 127th Psalm.
We’ll look in verse 1,
the words of wise King Solomon.
Psalm 127:1 says:
“Unless Jehovah builds the house.”
In Hebrew,
“house” can also refer to “family.”
“Unless Jehovah builds the house,
it is in vain
that its builders work hard on it.”
“Unless Jehovah builds the house”
—that’s powerful.
Any endeavor, even well-intentioned,
that doesn’t have Jehovah’s blessing
will ultimately be in vain.
So to build up Jehovah’s family,
we have to align our efforts
with Jehovah’s building methods.
So how can we
or how can you successfully do that
—build up the branch family
where you’re assigned?
Well, I’d like to invite you
to the book of Nehemiah.
We’ll turn to Nehemiah chapter 1,
and we’ll see how he applied
King Solomon’s wise counsel
to remember the Builder
and then what lessons we can learn from him.
We’ll begin in chapter 1 and verse 3,
where Hanani, Nehemiah’s brother,
is explaining Jerusalem’s sad situation.
Let’s pick up their conversation in verse 3:
“They [or Hanani
and those who traveled with him] replied:
“‘Those remaining there in the province
who have survived the captivity
“‘are in a terrible situation
and in disgrace.
“‘The walls of Jerusalem are broken down,
and its gates have been burned with fire.’”
Now, how did Nehemiah react
when he heard that information?
Well, let’s look in verse 4.
Nehemiah says:
“As soon as I heard these words,
“I sat down and began to weep
and mourn for days,
“and I kept fasting
[and notice]
and praying before the God of the heavens.”
This news had a profound impact on him.
He wept; he mourned; he fasted.
Why? Because he loved Jehovah,
Jerusalem was a center of pure worship,
and he loved his brothers and sisters.
But the question is,
What should he do about it?
He probably wanted to jump in
and fix things right away.
But did you notice
how he remembered the Builder?
His feelings were appropriate.
Something was needed,
but he didn’t get ahead of things.
He took time to deal with his feelings,
and it says he prayed repeatedly.
He focused on the Builder.
And it’s interesting
that Jehovah waited
some four months or so
to answer those prayers
—Kislev to Nisan—
whereas the rebuilding itself
only took about 52 days.
Now, four months may not be
a long period of time,
but it’s also not the next day.
In either case,
Nehemiah waited for Jehovah’s direction.
And when the direction came,
when the king granted
all of the things he had prayed for,
Nehemiah could be confident
that it was Jehovah doing the building.
Well, you know how Nehemiah felt.
You’ve seen Jehovah answer prayers
in your life.
Continue to rely on prayer,
even more so now
as you take on new assignments
and encounter new situations.
And, yes, when you have strong feelings
on a matter,
remember the Builder.
Get his direction.
Another thing to remember
about getting Jehovah’s direction
is that it’s not a passive process.
It’s an active process.
While Nehemiah waited,
he didn’t just sit around killing time.
He was active
in his spiritual routine and assignment,
and he kept meditating on the situation,
looking for solutions
that Jehovah could bless
and then including those in his prayers.
His spiritual routine helped him
through the discouraging moments,
and it also helped him remain ready
for when the answer did come.
And we know this
because at Nehemiah 2:4-8,
when King Artaxerxes granted his request,
he asked Nehemiah:
“How long will your journey be,
and when will you return?”
Nehemiah already had a timetable in mind.
Nehemiah also asked
for authorization letters for the governors
and for building materials
from “the keeper of the Royal Park.”
Nehemiah had been waiting actively
—praying, meditating.
Well, situations today
will not always be resolved in a day.
But like Nehemiah,
your spiritual routine
will provide you with stability,
and it’ll help you to be ready
when the direction comes.
Another beautiful effect
is that your example
in the ministry and at the meetings
and in your assignments
will also strengthen the friends.
As they too face challenges,
they’ll be helped to remember the Builder.
Another way to remember the Builder
is to remember Jehovah’s love for people.
Nehemiah, even under difficult circumstances,
noticed people.
Turn to Nehemiah chapter 3.
We’ll look at some of the highlights
here in chapter 3.
Nehemiah is going
around the city wall counterclockwise,
but notice what he describes
there in chapter 3.
We’ll look first in verse 1.
It says
that “the high priest and his brothers”
were building “the Sheep Gate.”
Look in verse 2:
“The men of Jericho were building.”
Let’s go down to verse 5.
There we see
the humble Tekoites working hard,
but the prominent ones not so much.
There’s a lesson in that.
Don’t be a prominent Tekoite.
We all want to work on the walls.
Go down to verse 12.
Here we notice Shallum, who’s a prince.
But who’s working with him?
His hardworking daughters.
It helps remind us
of our sisters that do so much
in today’s efforts
to advance Kingdom interests.
Turn to verse 20 here in the chapter.
And it says:
“Baruch . . . worked with fervor.”
Nehemiah noticed people,
and Jehovah inspired him to write about them.
Why?
One reason is that Jehovah wants us
to remember why we’re building.
He loves people.
Rebuilding the walls wasn’t the end goal.
Rather, rebuilding the walls
supported the end goal
—that of glorifying Jehovah,
fulfilling prophecy
and, yes, protecting Jehovah’s people.
Those actual walls
were destroyed again later.
But the account of Nehemiah lives on today.
And those who worked on the wall,
they too hoped to live forever.
So get to know the people
you’re building with.
They’re wonderful people.
Jehovah chooses amazing friends.
And like Nehemiah,
appreciate their qualities.
Think of your congregation
and your department as a spiritual building.
And the individual brothers and sisters
—we’re all the stones.
The mortar that binds us together
is the love and consideration
we show each other.
For those of you brothers
who may contribute to decision-making
when you return to your assignments,
humbly consider the ideas of others,
including brothers and sisters
under your oversight.
Additionally,
consider how a decision will affect others.
To strengthen others,
we need to know and love them,
just like the Builder does.
One final thought
regarding our Master Builder:
Jehovah is a happy God.
Imperfection in Satan’s system
causes suffering.
That’s true.
But remember
that serving Jehovah brings joy
despite those challenges.
And there is strength in that joy.
After completing the wall, at Nehemiah 8:10,
Nehemiah reminded the people
that “the joy of Jehovah
[was their] stronghold.”
Knowing that they had done Jehovah’s will
and had Jehovah’s approval
gave them strength,
and that had an impact on them.
Notice that in Nehemiah chapter 12.
At Nehemiah 12:43,
this verse talks
about the day of inauguration
after all of the challenges
had been overcome.
And notice how the people felt
at Nehemiah 12:43:
“On that day
they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced,
“for the true God
made them rejoice with great joy.
“The women and the children also rejoiced,
so that the rejoicing of Jerusalem
could be heard far away.”
Even with brand-new high walls,
they could be heard at a distance.
That sounds like the joyful noise
before our meetings and assemblies
or even here this morning
before your graduation program.
But did you notice that it was Jehovah
who “made them rejoice”?
Despite the challenges now
and those to come,
strengthen others
by remembering to enjoy Jehovah’s service.
He’s a happy God.
The psalmist said:
“Unless Jehovah builds the house.”
Well, Jehovah is building the house.
And you, dear graduates,
along with all of us,
have the wonderful privilege of working
alongside him in this building work.
As you strengthen and stabilize
Jehovah’s people,
humbly remember the Builder.
Seek his direction in prayer,
stay busy in your spiritual routine,
love the brothers and sisters,
and enjoy serving Jehovah.
Like Nehemiah, you’re guaranteed success,
and Jehovah will remember you favorably
when you remember the Builder.
I don’t know about you,
but it makes me want to read
the book of Nehemiah all over again.
Well, now we’re going to hear
from another recently appointed helper
to the Service Committee,
Brother Betty Georges.
And he is going to talk to us
on the subject “The Steps of Love.”
So, what do you think?
What are the steps of love?
There are three
—step one: love of God;
step two: love of neighbor;
and step three: love of self.
And, of course, we’re not talking
about the selfish, self-centered attitude
that people have today.
We all need a measure
of self-worth, self-respect.
If we were to take a picture of these steps,
it would look something like this.
It makes sense that the highest step
and the first is love of God.
And the lowest
and the third step is love of self.
Because according to “the law of the Christ,”
we ought to love our neighbor more than self
because we ought to be willing to die
for our neighbor.
For the sake of this talk,
we’ll focus on step three.
The reason being is that though the lowest,
for some it may be the hardest to climb
because of lack of self-esteem.
The question to you is this,
How can we help others
build or boost their self-esteem?
What do you think?
By imitating Christ.
What did he do?
He gave love to others in three ways:
by being encouraging, by caring,
and by trusting.
One example of Jesus being encouraging
is found in Luke chapter 10,
so please follow with me in Luke chapter 10.
And there, as we glance down to verse 27,
we have a man versed in the Law.
And there he clearly identified
the three steps
according to the Law of Moses,
the Mosaic Law.
But note the encouragement Jesus gave him
in verse 28
—verse 28.
At Luke 10:28, Jesus said to him:
“You answered correctly;
“keep doing this
[or keep giving love; keep showing love]
and you will get life.”
What’s the lesson for us?
We want to be quick to give,
yes, commendation but also motivation.
One Watchtower  said this.
It said (The Watchtower  said):
‘At this point in the race for life,
‘our brothers don’t need critics.
‘There are enough critics in the world,
but they need friends
to help them reach the finish line.’
In Luke chapter 18,
we have an example of Jesus being caring
—showing tender, loving care.
So in Luke chapter 18—
the context of Luke chapter 18
is it’s close to the spring of 33 C.E.
Jesus is on his way.
He’s on a mission, going to Jerusalem
to observe his last Passover.
And there in verse 35 of Luke chapter 18—
I’m sure you remember
that the context
of Luke chapter 18 is near Jericho.
And Jericho to Jerusalem is a day’s journey.
And there, Luke 18:35, near Jericho,
there’s a blind man
sitting beside the road begging.
What did Jesus do for this man?
Please scroll down to verse 40,
verse 40, Luke 18:40.
Jesus cared enough to stop.
He’s on a mission, but he stopped.
In verse 41,
he cared enough
to show personal interest.
Did you notice the question
Jesus just asked the man?
“What do you want me to do for you?”
And we can try to picture,
imagine, the tone of voice of Jesus:
“What do you want me to do for you?”
Now, let’s think about this a little bit.
Is it possible that Jesus
could see the man was blind?
Probably.
So why the question?
Probably to take into consideration
his feelings.
‘What do you need?
What do you want?’
And interestingly, in verse 39 (in verse 39),
the crowd was trying to keep this man quiet.
But now, in verse 41,
Jesus says: ‘Speak to me.
‘What do you want?
What do you need?
How can I help you?’
Personal interest.
And to drive home the lesson of this account,
here’s a verified experience.
A brother took his nephew,
13 years old, to visit Bethel.
And at the time, the nephew
was going through family turmoil
to the point
that it caused him to lack motivation.
So as they’re touring Bethel,
a Bethelite stopped
and took a few minutes
to show personal interest.
The result?
At the very next assembly,
the 13-year-old got baptized.
Two years later, at 15,
he started regular pioneering.
At 17, he was appointed
a ministerial servant.
Now he is 19;
he put in his application for Bethel.
All of this because someone stopped
and showed personal interest.
Can you think of an example
of Jesus showing trust to others?
Well, let’s go to Luke
—this time in Luke chapter 22,
Luke chapter 22.
And as we look at verse 34,
Luke 22:34,
it’s when Jesus reminded or forewarned,
not reminded but forewarned Peter
that he would deny him three times.
Now let’s pause there.
At that moment
when Peter denied his Master three times,
what do you think
was his level of self-worth?
Yeah, at an all-time low.
It would have been so easy for Peter
to just give up and never get back up.
But what helped him
to climb back onto step three?
Probably what Jesus told him in verse 32.
Look at the latter part of verse 32.
We’ll focus on four words:
You notice, “once you have returned”
—“once you have returned.”
And probably these words
may have kept ringing in Peter’s ears
as he was down and out
and slowly getting back up
—“once you have returned.”
Because Jesus is expressing what here?
Expressing confidence.
‘Yes, you will fall,
but you will get back to step three.’
But not only that.
Hey, don’t forget step two, because
you notice the latter part of verse 32:
“Once you have returned,
[what’s the mission?] strengthen.”
And the Greek word
literally means “make firm” your brothers.
Love is eager
to believe the best in others.
Love is trusting.
So, what could be the result
as we help others to boost their self-esteem?
Well, let’s go back to our image.
What could be the result?
Well, as you climb up to step three,
you agree it makes it a little bit easier
to go on to step two
—love of others, or love of neighbor—
which is a prerequisite
for love of God, step one.
What did the apostle John say?
What did he say?
Well, we cannot say
we love God if we don’t love our neighbor.
Having attended Gilead,
you heard the fine talk of Brother Jedele.
What is expected of you?
To strengthen and stabilize the organization.
It has been said that this can be done
one publisher at a time.
And that reminds me of about ten years ago
—actually, ten years ago—
my wife and I were transferred
from Canada to Congo.
And I’ll never forget what a friend told me.
He said: “You know what?
The friends in Congo
“—they don’t need another Messiah.
“Trust me, they don’t.
All they need is love.”
So keep on loving
as Jesus taught us
by being encouraging,
by caring, by trusting.
And the friends
will give you love back in return.
May Jehovah help you to do just that.
Yes, we love you.
Well, that was worthwhile, wasn’t it?
Beautiful presentation.
Now, Brother David Iannelli,
who is a member of the Writing staff,
is going to speak to us on the theme
“Never Forget What Jehovah Remembers.”
There’s something Jehovah remembers
that we do well never to forget.
It involves the way he views us
and treats us right now.
And all of us, including you
who are graduating from Gilead today,
do well never to forget it.
What is it?
Well, open your Bible, please, to Psalm 103.
And the answer is
in the familiar words recorded in verse 14,
and just please keep your Bible open here.
The psalmist David,
speaking of Jehovah, says:
“For he well knows how we are formed,
remembering that we are dust.”
Jehovah remembers that we are dust.
What does it mean,
and why should we never forget it?
Well, first, what does this expression mean?
‘Jehovah remembers that we’re dust.’
Simply put, this:
Jehovah is mindful of our sinful nature
and inclined to forgive repentant sinners.
Notice how the context indicates this.
If you look in verses 1 and 2,
David begins the psalm by exhorting himself
never to forget what Jehovah has done.
And what has Jehovah done?
In verse 3, first,
David mentions that Jehovah forgives.
And in the verses that follow,
David four times refers to mercy,
the tender quality
that moves Jehovah to forgive.
And he four times refers to loyal love,
the love that moves Jehovah
to treat us as his special property.
Forgiveness, mercy, loyal love
—they’re connected.
How so?
Well, mercy prompts forgiveness.
As one scholar put it:
“God’s mercy is the cause,
the removal of sin, the result.”
And in this context,
mercy and forgiveness
are part of Jehovah’s loyal love.
You might think of Jehovah’s loyal love
as a large house.
Well, mercy and forgiveness
are spacious rooms in that house.
And then we come to verses 11-13.
David uses a series of three similes
—powerful word pictures—
to describe first the height,
then the breadth,
then the paternal tenderness
of what one Bible reference work calls
“Jehovah’s forgiving love.”
And then we come to verse 14.
David now explains why Jehovah
is inclined to show us his forgiving love.
He says: “He well knows how we are formed.”
Jehovah is well-aware that he formed Adam
“out of dust from the ground”
and that even perfect humans
have natural limitations
—the need to eat, to sleep, to breathe.
But when Adam and Eve sinned,
being dust took on new meaning.
Regarding verse 14,
The Watchtower  once explained:
“David was speaking . . .
about human frailties
caused by inherited imperfection.”
So Jehovah is well-aware of the frailties
—the limitations of our sinful nature.
He understands; he knows how easy it is,
how prone we are to sin,
and how strong the temptation to sin can be.
But Jehovah is not just aware of this.
David goes on to say that He remembers it.
And the Hebrew word here
can mean “active remembering.”
It implies a response
from the one remembering.
In other words,
because Jehovah remembers that we’re dust,
he is moved to do something.
Do what?
Well, according to the context, to show mercy
by forgiving repentant sinners.
So, what’s the lesson?
What’s the meaning
of ‘Jehovah remembers that we are dust?’
Again, put simply: He is mindful
of our sinful nature and inclined
to show us his forgiving love.
We might sum up the lesson with three words:
“limitations,” “expectations,”
and “dealings” (or actions).
Because Jehovah understands the limitations
of our sinful nature,
he expects that we will fall short at times.
And when we do, he is inclined
to deal mercifully with us,
to forgive our repentant heart.
What about the second question, though?
Why should we,
including you graduating today,
never forget what Jehovah remembers?
Well, for you members of the 154th class,
not forgetting what Jehovah remembers
can actually help you fulfill the purpose
of your Gilead training,
which (as we heard) is to stabilize
and strengthen the work.
Now, consider two ways that this psalm
can help you
—and by extension all of us listening in—
to do just that.
First: To strengthen the work,
be a force for peace and unity
by imitating Jehovah’s forgiveness.
How?
Well, recall three key words,
“limitations influence expectations,”
which affect how we deal with others.
Now, it’s interesting;
we often do this automatically.
Imagine a group of brothers playing soccer.
One twists his ankle badly.
The other brothers do not now expect him
to run, kick, do body feints.
They see the limitation,
they adjust their expectations,
and then they deal kindly,
perhaps gently helping him off the field.
And yet, in our everyday interactions
with others,
it is so easy to forget
what Jehovah remembers
—the limitations of our sinful nature.
So try this: When you feel resentment
welling up in you
because of what a fellow worker
has said or done,
stop and ask yourself:
“Am I forgetting what Jehovah remembers
—the limitations of my brother’s sinful,
imperfect nature?”
You see, by reflecting on the limitation,
you can adjust your expectations,
which makes it easier to deal mercifully
by letting go of that resentment
and thus being a force for peace and unity.
What about the second way?
Here’s a second way the psalm can help:
To strengthen the work,
strengthen the workers,
for example, by helping others
accept Jehovah’s forgiveness.
At times, you may learn that a fellow worker
is struggling with stubborn guilt
over past mistakes.
He’s forgetting what Jehovah remembers
—that Jehovah is mindful of our limitations
and inclined to forgive.
But perhaps the brother is also remembering
what Jehovah forgets
—the sins that he’s already forgiven
and would never hold against that brother.
How can you help him?
Well, try this: Use Psalm 103:14
to remind him of why Jehovah
is inclined to forgive
and then perhaps use verse 12
to remind him of how far-reaching
that forgiveness is.
Verse 12 reads:
“As far off as the sunrise [or east]
“is from the sunset [or west],
so far off . . .
he has put our transgressions.”
How far is east from west?
The Close to Jehovah  book
explains it this way:
“In a sense, east is always
“at the utmost distance
“imaginable from west;
the two points can never meet.”
So, what does that mean for our sins?
One reference work explained it this way:
“If sin be removed so far,
“then we may be sure
that the scent, the trace,
“the very memory of it
must be entirely gone.”
A scent can trigger a memory.
But when Jehovah forgives,
he puts our sins so far off
that there remains
not even the trace of a scent
that could possibly trigger him
to remember it
and hold it against us.
Use Psalm 103
to help others accept
Jehovah’s far-reaching forgiveness.
If you strengthen the worker,
you strengthen the work.
So for you members of the 154th class,
as you leave here today,
may you be determined
to use your Gilead training
to strengthen the work and the workers.
And to that end,
let the beautiful words of Psalm 103
help you to (1) be a force
for peace and unity
by imitating Jehovah’s forgiveness
and (2) help downhearted ones
to accept that far-reaching forgiveness.
The lesson for you
is really a lesson for us all:
May we never forget what Jehovah remembers.
And (while we’re at it)
may we also do our best
not to remember what Jehovah forgets.
We appreciate that warm reassurance.
Now, the next two speakers
are members of the teaching staff.
And Brother Clarke here
is the latest addition to the teaching staff.
He was serving in Czechia,
the Czech Republic,
before he came here.
I guess it was this year
—wasn’t it, Jeremy?—
that you came here.
Anyway, he’s going to speak to us
on the theme “May Jehovah Know.”
He was buried with the kings,
but he was not a king.
He lived 130 years,
but perhaps
for the first 90 years of his life,
there is nothing recorded that he achieved.
And one major event that was recorded,
he had to keep secret,
without others knowing, for about six years.
Who is this man?
High Priest Jehoiada.
What does Jehovah
want you to know about him?
It is this: Jehoiada was loyal to Jehovah,
even without recognition from others.
So the question to you is,
If only Jehovah knows
what you do and your loyalty
without recognition from others,
is that enough
to sustain you in your loyalty?
For how long? a year? two?
six? longer?
Before you came to Gilead School,
maybe it mattered more to you
what others saw in you,
what they thought of you, your achievements.
But in class, a deep study of the Scriptures
opened up your heart;
you looked at the attitudes
and feelings and thoughts,
perhaps hidden there for a long time.
You looked long and hard
at “the secret person of the heart . . . ,
which is of great value in the eyes of God”
—the inner you.
And this drew you closer to Jehovah.
You felt his reassuring love.
Now more than ever, you realize
how much Jehovah sees you and knows you.
Do you not have the same thoughts
as we find in Psalm 139?
Let’s read the first four verses.
Psalm 139:
“O Jehovah, you have searched through me,
“and you know me.
“You know when I sit down and when I rise up.
“You discern my thoughts from afar.
“You observe me when I travel
“and when I lie down;
you are familiar with all my ways.
“There is not a word on my tongue,
but look! O Jehovah, you . . . know it well.”
You have joy that Jehovah knows you.
He always knew you,
but now you know that he knows you.
And you feel more secure
in your relationship with him
and less concerned
about recognition from others.
This was High Priest Jehoiada.
Now, he was born some years
after King Solomon’s temple
was completed in 1027 B.C.E.
That means that in his lifetime,
the nation of Israel split in two,
leaving only the two-tribe kingdom
using the temple.
He saw kings of Judah
introduce idolatry and sex worship.
There were two good kings,
Asa and Jehoshaphat.
But remember, Jehoshaphat had his son
marry Jezebel’s daughter, Athaliah,
from the north,
and brought her wicked influence
right into Jerusalem.
Things were going from bad to worse.
And in just 100 years,
the temple was so neglected
that it needed major repair
just to be structurally sound again.
Meanwhile,
they built a temple for Baal worship.
And Jehoiada sees all this.
Here he is an old man, the high priest.
How did he keep his loyalty
through those distressing years?
The Bible doesn’t say.
But Jehovah knows it all.
Through meditation and prayer,
wouldn’t he have to look at his own heart
(his inner person)
and look at his attitude
and his feelings toward pure worship
(not becoming lax
in standing for what is right,
unlike High Priest Eli when he got old)?
And here Jehoiada is a man of authority.
Yet, he doesn’t step outside
of the bounds of his assignment,
but he patiently waits on Jehovah.
Well, these years of loyal love
helped him face
the greatest challenge when he was old.
And this he had to do without others knowing.
What was that?
Well, it’s around 905 B.C.E.,
and let’s pick up the account
in 2 Chronicles chapter 22.
Here we find King Ahaziah of Judah has died,
and then the unimaginable happens.
In 2 Chronicles chapter 22,
we’ll start at verse 10:
“When Athaliah, Ahaziah’s mother,
“saw that her son had died,
“she rose up and destroyed
the entire royal line
of the house of Judah.”
Athaliah kills her own grandsons
and makes herself queen illegally.
Now the Davidic line
to the promised offspring
is at risk of being cut off.
Let’s read verse 11: “However,
“Jehoshabeath the daughter of the king
“took Jehoash the son of Ahaziah
“and stole him away from among the sons
of the king who were to be put to death,
and she put him
and his nurse in an inner bedroom.”
Who is Jehoshabeath?
Read on.
She’s “the daughter of King Jehoram
“(she was the wife of Jehoiada the priest
and the sister of Ahaziah).”
And she “managed to keep him [the baby]
“concealed from Athaliah,
so that she did not put him to death.
“He remained with him for six years,
hidden at the house of the true God,
while Athaliah was ruling over the land.”
For six long years, Jehoiada,
Jehoshabeath, and a nurse
had a big secret—a small baby—
the last living heir.
Now, it’s possible that this inner bedroom
could have been a storage room at the palace.
And when it was safe, they smuggled the baby
into a chamber in the temple.
If that happened, imagine the risk.
The timing would have had to be perfect
so they wouldn’t get caught.
And in the temple for six years,
do you think there were some close calls?
Well, at one point, Athaliah’s own sons
broke into the temple
and stole items for Baal worship.
If that happened during this period,
imagine if they had seen the child—game over!
This means that not once could Jehoiada
or Jehoshabeath let out their secret.
They couldn’t complain to others.
They couldn’t give up.
They couldn’t give out.
That means they had no recognition,
no acknowledgment,
no appreciation for their effort.
That means they’d rely on prayer,
looking to only Jehovah
for support and reassurance.
They would look to the Scriptures,
like Psalm 139.
“O Jehovah, . . . you know me.”
You can hear them
adapt it to their situation:
“You know that we’re
protecting the rightful king.”
And they’re
not just babysitting for six years;
they’re teaching the child to love Jehovah,
to love His Law, to be a good king for Judah.
They would have to work unitedly as a couple.
And that brings us to her.
Let’s talk about her for a moment
—Jehoshabeath.
Clearly, Jehovah gives her the credit
for saving her nephew, Jehoash.
But at this point, how old is she?
Well, her father, King Jehoram,
who died the year before,
was only 40 years old.
So she is still quite young
and, yet, married to a man
some decades older than she was.
So here we have a young woman who is royalty
married to a much older man
who has a position of high rank.
What’s her angle?
Is she abusing her authority?
Is she trying to manipulate things
like her stepmother, Athaliah?
No.
She’s risking her life
to protect the rightful king
(in line with Jehovah’s will),
supporting her husband
and apparently
without recognition from others.
She reminds us of you, dear sisters.
Much of what you achieve
may not be as noticeable
as your husband’s achievements.
And that could just be
the nature of the assignment,
which means you may get less attention.
But you take pleasure
in that Jehovah knows
all that you do for him.
And we love you for that.
So, you brothers,
many things you do will be noticed.
There may be some things where you won’t
get recognition, perhaps for a long time.
And by the way,
it’s not wrong to get recognition.
As humans, we thrive on it.
And if you’re ever in a position
where you can recognize
the good work or loyalty of someone else,
don’t pass it up.
Let them know.
They’d appreciate it.
However, your loyalty
is based
not on what others will see and know
but on the unseen, loyalty from the heart.
Remember Jehoiada.
Yes, eventually everybody found out
what he did, and he got honor.
But what was the secret to his success?
Was it not in the years before
—the small things, the hidden things,
the unseen things only Jehovah knows?
The name Jehoiada means
“May Jehovah Know”
—how fitting!
May Jehovah know all your loyal acts
—seen and unseen—
and “your Father who looks on in secret
will repay you.”
That certainly brought
Jehoiada to life, didn’t it?
Well, Mark Noumair usually
has something very interesting to say.
Today—
No pressure.
Today he’s going to talk to us
on the subject “Side by Side.”
We don’t know her name,
but we know her husband.
He was a hardworking fisherman,
outspoken apostle,
writer of two Bible books,
and the only person besides Jesus
to walk on water.
We know Peter,
but sometimes we forget his wife.
What was Peter’s wife like?
What were they like as a married couple?
And what can they teach
you 24 married couples?
This is the first time in close to a decade
we’ve had an entire class
of only married couples.
Thus, we’ve chosen Peter and his wife
so that you can learn specific lessons
that you can bring
to your places of assignment
but especially to strengthen your marriages
as you apply this
and you serve together side by side.
Let’s begin by reading Mark chapter 1
—Mark 1:16:
“While walking alongside the Sea of Galilee,
“he saw Simon [that’s Jesus saw Simon]
“and Simon’s brother Andrew casting
their nets into the sea,
for they were fishermen.”
Peter is a fisherman.
He brings home the fish.
His wife cooks the fish.
And if she doesn’t cook the fish,
she sells the fish
(like “a capable [Proverbs 31] wife”)
and brings home the money.
That helps support the house.
It allows Peter
to handle his responsibilities.
All is well, a great couple
working side by side together.
However, life changes suddenly
—verses 17 and 18:
“So Jesus said to them:
‘Come after me,
“and I will make you fishers of men.’
And at once
they abandoned their nets and followed him.”
In faith, Peter abandons his fishing business
and follows Jesus.
What did she think about that?
Did she expect that?
Did she become insecure
and uncertain now about the future?
Would she feel that her life now
has been upended
by the decisions
of her impulsive, big-hearted husband?
“Peter!
What are you doing?”
We have very good reason to conclude
that Peter’s wife supported the decision,
willing to and ready
to stand right at Peter’s side
as he took on added responsibilities.
Let’s gain more insight
into the life of Peter and his wife
with verse 29:
“At that they left the synagogue and went
“to the home of Simon and Andrew
with James and John.”
Well, this verse explains that they went
to the home of Simon and Andrew.
They lived together.
So Peter’s wife was agreeable
to sharing her living space
with Andrew, Peter’s brother.
And likely the close friends of Peter,
James and John, were frequent guests.
And you can hear Peter saying,
“Come over anytime.”
And his wife does the cooking.
That’s the way it would work.
She could most likely hear
the “Sons of Thunder” coming.
“Here they come.”
And Peter says: “That’s them.
Cook more fish!”
That’s the way it probably would be.
But here’s the question,
Why could Peter feel free
to bring his friends home
(and sometimes most likely
they came in an unexpected manner)?
Because he knew his wife.
And interestingly,
when he wrote his first letter,
he advised husbands to dwell with their wives
“according to knowledge.”
Peter knew his wife.
And he knew that she would be willing
to accommodate the guests
because she knew her husband.
“That’s Peter: ‘Come on over.’”
She and Peter were a team.
She knew that having them in the home
involved some inconvenience.
We get that.
But think of the conversations
that she would be privy to.
As Peter, Andrew, James, and John
would discuss Jesus’ ministry,
she would sit there:
‘Oh, my! I’m so glad they came’
—the blessing that she would get
as they talked about Jesus’ ministry!
So here’s your first big lesson:
Something very similar
can happen to you as a couple.
Your husband’s good shepherding
will result in warm conversations,
and strong friendships are forged.
And that could lead
to spontaneous invitations,
like, “Say, come on over for a snack.”
And you get a text,
“Guess who’s coming to dinner?”
But is it inconvenient at times?
Yes.
But there is a Bible principle,
and the Bible principle here
overrides all cultures, past and present:
Be self-sacrificing and hospitable.
So be like Peter and his wife,
and think of the spiritual blessings
you would receive
as you get to know
your brothers and sisters better.
That overrides even the inconvenience.
But the self-sacrificing spirit
of this dynamic couple doesn’t stop there.
Let’s read verse 30:
“Now Simon’s mother-in-law
was lying down sick with a fever,
and they at once told him [Jesus] about her.”
So now we learn that Peter and his wife
are caring for a parent.
And at this moment, she is sick.
Now, what demands that places
on a married couple
—you know that—
caring for a sick parent!
And for a married couple to live
with one in-law naturally has its challenges.
But living with a brother-in-law
and a mother-in-law,
now, that brings it to an entirely new level.
Can you hear Peter’s wife
whispering to Peter,
“Your brother Andrew is driving me crazy”
and Peter being tempted to blurt out,
“But what about your mother”?
No, but we’re not saying that ever happened.
Nevertheless
—nevertheless—
we know that living with in-laws
and caring for aging parents
poses unique challenges for a couple.
That would require great sacrifices.
That’s what we’re talking about.
However, with sacrifices come blessings,
just as we’ve discussed
over and over in class:
With a sacrifice comes a blessing.
In verse 31,
Jesus performs a miracle right in the home.
Mom is cured.
Imagine that!
What a tender, intimate moment
this must have been for Peter and his wife!
“Thank Jehovah.”
They probably said
a heartfelt prayer thanking Jehovah
—intimate, quiet, prayerful.
But look at what happens next
in verses 32 and 33:
“After evening had fallen,
when the sun had set,
“the people began bringing to him
all who were ill and demon possessed;
and the whole city
was gathered right at the door.”
Where is the intimacy now?
It went from quiet to chaos.
Imagine the scene: Sick people from all over
come to Peter’s house to get healed.
How would you feel if a whole city
of sick and demon-possessed people
showed up at your door?
Talk about uninvited guests!
And Peter’s wife didn’t have time to prepare
and plan and make the house perfect.
“No, not yet.
The table is not right.
The chairs aren’t right.”
No, that wasn’t it.
Things weren’t perfect.
And what if a crowd that size
damaged the home,
like the desperate Jews
who on a later occasion
made a hole in someone’s roof
to drop down someone
so that they could be healed?
At this point, Peter’s wife
certainly could have complained,
“Get these people out of here!”
But there is no record of a complaint.
Consider this: Years later,
when Peter counseled wives
to cultivate “the quiet and mild spirit,”
did his wife’s example
give him the freedom of speech
to offer that advice?
And Peter must have thanked his wife
—thanked her—
for her loyally being by his side
as they supported Jesus’ ministry.
Another big lesson for you:
As you deal with aging parents
and health issues,
look for Jehovah’s blessing
and enjoy your periods of calm.
However,
remember that we are living at a time
when ‘the scene of the world is changing,’
and it can change quickly.
A natural disaster or civil unrest
can break out unexpectedly.
And you might have
to accommodate those seeking aid.
And though you might not be ready for that
(things aren’t perfect),
don’t worry about that.
But allow your self-sacrificing spirit
to just move forward,
going the extra mile.
And, husbands,
don’t forget to thank your wife
for being by your side
as you respond
to the needs of the organization.
First Corinthians 9:5
indicates that Peter’s wife traveled with him
for at least some of the time.
Traveling with Peter
would have included hard trips
and dangerous conditions.
Peter was arrested in Jerusalem
one time, two times, three times,
arrested again, flogged.
This time, James was arrested with him.
James is beheaded.
Would Peter’s wife say,
“Will I see my husband again”?
It could not have been easy
to be married to a man
so involved in sacred service.
Between the years 62 and 64 C.E.,
we find Peter,
who is now perhaps in his 60’s,
serving where the need is greater in Babylon,
where Jehovah
inspired him to write two letters.
As he is finishing his second letter
in what now would become
the twilight of his life,
how thankful he must have been
to have had such a faithful,
loving, loyal wife
by his side over the years!
All things considered, here’s the gold:
Work unselfishly as a team;
be positive when confronted
with unexpected challenges.
Husbands, highly value
the loyal support of your wife
and thank her.
Wives, realize
that after Jehovah and Jesus,
you—you—are probably the closest person
who can work intimately with your husband
for his success and, of course, your own.
And, for you 24 dear couples,
be determined to maintain your stride
as you serve together side by side.
Well, that was very enjoyable, wasn’t it?
We hope you enjoyed Part 1!
Parts 2 and 3 will be available
on jw.org later this month.
Our postcard for this month is from Uruguay.
Located between Argentina and Brazil,
Uruguay has beautiful coastlines
along the Atlantic Ocean
and rolling hills in its interior.
The pristine beaches of Punta del Este
are a popular tourist destination.
Several rivers in the country,
such as the Rio Negro
and the Río de la Plata,
create stunning landscapes
and make the soil fertile.
These breathtaking views
provide a picturesque backdrop
for preaching the good news.
Uruguay currently has 149 congregations
preaching in five different languages,
including Uruguayan Sign Language
and Portuñol, a pidgin language
composed of Spanish and Portuguese.
Like the fertile,
productive fields where they preach,
the harvest in the ministry is great,
as the 12,000 publishers
average 11,000 Bible studies per month!
In the 1960’s,
missionaries used rafts
to traverse the Cebollatí River
in order to reach remote territories,
and the tradition continues to this day.
Trucks loaded with carts
are ferried across the river
so that publishers can witness
in the local town squares.
After a long day of preaching,
brothers and sisters
enjoy relaxing around campfires,
singing, and enjoying maté
—a traditional herbal drink
made with yerba
that pairs well
with tortas fritas, or fried cakes.
The 30 publishers
of the Cebollatí Congregation
and all the brothers and sisters in Uruguay
send their love and greetings
to the worldwide brotherhood.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.